Planningguide (#5)
XSEDE/XCRI-Docs: docs/toolkits/openstack-operations-maintenance.md

# OpenStack Operations and Maintenance

### Useful Additions and Operations

---

#### Floating IP Addresses

> Adding in and configuring a subnet of floating IPs can be extremely useful for your users if they would like to have a persistent IP address.  It's also good for administrators as this allows VMs that need to be accessible but not necessarily publicly routable to not use an IP address, which are becoming increasingly scarce, and simply have them on an internal network.  To set this up, we do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding in and configuring a subnet of floating IPs can be extremely useful for your users if they would like to have a persistent IP address.  It's also good for administrators as this allows VMs that need to be accessible but not necessarily publicly routable to not use a public IPv4 address, which are becoming increasingly scarce, and simply have them on an internal network.  To set this up, we do the following:
```

TO-DO: add in steps for this. It should just be "create a pool" but I don't think documentation exists.

#### Auto-allocated Network

> The auto-allocated network can save a large amount of time for the administrators and/or support personnel by having users simply create a network/router/subnet with one line instead of the gratuitously arduous way of creating them one by one with the CLI.  This is also necessary to be activated for popular additional interfaces like Exosphere [TO-DO: include link here].  The setup is relatively simple for how much work it cuts out for your users.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Automatic allocation of network topologies](https://docs.openstack.org/neutron/latest/admin/config-auto-allocation.html) can save a large amount of time for the administrators and/or support personnel by having users simply create a network, router, and subnet with one line, instead of the gratuitously arduous way of creating them one by one with the CLI.  This also supports popular additional interfaces like Exosphere ([link](https://gitlab.com/exosphere/exosphere/#to-use-with-an-openstack-cloud)).  The setup is relatively simple for how much work it cuts out for your users.  
```

providing links

``` bash
openstack network show <external network name>
```
If it is the default network, you can move on to the next step.  If not, set it to default with:
``` bash
openstack network set <external network name> --default
```

Now, we need a default subnet pool that the auto-allocated network will use. You can create this with:
``` bash
openstack subnet pool create --share --default --pool-prefix 192.168.0.0/16 --default-prefix-length 25 shared-default
```
This will create a default subnet pool using the `192.168.0.0/16` subnet, each carving off a /25 subnet off.  Each subnet will allow 128 different VMs on the network and also allow you to be able to carve off 512 subnets.  You can adjust these numbers if they won't fit your use case.  

Now, your users can create an auto-allocated network with:
``` bash
openstack network auto allocated topology create --or-show
```

#### Adding and Managing Users

This is probably something that is more necessary than recommended.  In this section, we will go over adding users, allocations, adjusting quotas for specific use cases, etc.  

To add a user, you can run:
``` bash

> openstack user create --domain <default domain> --password-prompt <user name>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
openstack user create --password-prompt <user name>
```

A new OpenStack operator may not know what `<default domain>` is, or have any domains set up at all, as this guide doesn't otherwise talk about them. So, leaving this argument out may avoid some confusion.

```
This will ask you for a password.  You can pass this information to each user to allow them to access the OpenStack cloud.  To delete a user, it's simply:
``` bash
openstack user delete <user name>
```

The newly created user will need a project to operate on as well.  If they don't have a project, you can create one with:
``` bash

> openstack project create --domain <domain name> --description "<A good description here>" <project name>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
openstack project create --description "<A good description here>" <project name>
```

(same as above)

```

> In OpenStack, you don't simply add a user to a project.  There needs to be a role associaction created, associating the user and the project.  The role itself can be a priviledged user or standard user.  If you don't have a standard user role created, you can create one with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In OpenStack, you don't simply add a user to a project.  There needs to be a role associaction created, associating the user and the project.  The role itself can be a privileged user or standard user.  If you don't have a standard user role created, you can create one with:
```

spelling fix

``` bash
openstack role create <role name>
```
Role associations are created with:
``` bash
openstack role add --project <project name> --user <user name> <role name>
```

To remove the role association, run:
``` bash
openstack role remove --user <user name> --project <project name> <role name>
```

> Oftentimes, different projects or users will have different needs of the OpenStack cloud.  This can lead to the default quotas not allowing them to do something that fits their workflow.  For example, perhaps they need more than the default quota of volumes.  These can be adjusted with the CLI by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Managing Quotas

Oftentimes, different projects or users will have different needs of the OpenStack cloud.  This can lead to the default quotas not allowing them to do something that fits their workflow.  For example, perhaps they need more than the default quota of volumes.  These can be adjusted with the CLI by running:
```

Adding a section heading, because the text moves on from talking about roles to talking about quotas.

``` bash
openstack quota set --volumes <new volume quota> <project name>
```
Note that quotas are set per project and not per user.

### Maintenance

---

#### NTP

> 	- What NTP Errors look like

Reviewer: When you start with 4-space-indented bullets, Markdown assumes you want a code block, so mkdocs renders it like this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13605043/187511340-9b2f8c82-f446-4ebe-9045-f7d8b964fc38.png)

You get fixed-width font, horizontal scrolling, and random bold keywords -- not great. The fix is just to start your outer-most level of bullets at the beginning of the line, and for sub-levels, indent by 2 or 4 spaces from there.

If you render with `mkdocs serve` you'll see several sections that need this tweak.

Author: Yikes.  I think I want to remove this format as a whole, and use something more outline-esque.

		The biggest offender here is going to be any clock drift errors in the logs and odd behavior by computes on some isolated VMs.
	- How to fix
		Usually this is either two issues.  First, the time daemon running on your node may simply need a restart.  The second is that it could simply be a misconfiguration on said time daemon.

> #### Rabbit MQ

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### RabbitMQ
```
no space between `t` and `M`

	- Checks:
		To check the status of your RabbitMQ cluster, run the following on one of the rabbitmq nodes:
``` bash
rabbitmqctl cluster_status
```
Some things to look for here, are any errors or alarms under the [Alarms] section.

> 	- What rabbitMQ errors look like
> 		rabbitMQ errors can be tough to diagnose.  All the openstack services send messages through rabbitMQ, so there is a broad range of errors that an administrator can come across while trying to determine the cause.
> 	- How to fix
> 		The simplest fix is usually going to be a dead rabbitMQ service on one of the nodes.  Usually a restart can fix these.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- What RabbitMQ errors look like
		RabbitMQ errors can be tough to diagnose.  All the OpenStack services send messages through RabbitMQ, so there is a broad range of errors that an administrator can come across while trying to determine the cause.
	- How to fix
		The simplest fix is usually going to be a dead RabbitMQ service on one of the nodes.  Usually a restart can fix these.
```

capitalization fixes

> #### Mysql
> 
> 	- Checks for a single node database:
> SSH to the MYSQL node and log into the database with:
> `mysql`
> Also, you can check the logs to make sure there are no discrepancies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### MySQL

	- Checks for a single node database:
SSH to the MySQL node and log into the database with:
`mysql`
Also, you can check the logs to make sure there are no discrepancies.
```
capitalization

Also, we might want to say something like "MySQL (a.k.a. MariaDB)" to de-confuse new operators who may be using MariaDB instead of MySQL :shrug:

	- Checks for a multiple node cluster:

> SSH to the MYSQL node and log into the database with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SSH to the MySQL node and log into the database with:
```

`mysql`
and run
```
SHOW GLOBAL STATUS LIKE 'wsrep_%';
```
And verify the cluster count matches the number of nodes in your database cluster.

> 	- What MYSQL errors look like
> 		If MYSQL is causing issues, you'll usually get a 503 error when attempting to run commands from the CLI.
> 	- How to fix
> 		This could be as simple as a dead mysql daemon on one of your nodes.  You can diagnose this by running through the checks above.  
> 	- Database Discrepancies
> 		Throughout the life of your cloud, you may come into issues where the database and openstack reflect different information.  This could be a VM that shows a host on one machine but it's actually on another, a volume that is stuck in a `reserved` state but won't change back to active/available, etc.  To fix this, we need to log into the MYSQL cluster by running `mysql` and updating the discrepancy with `update ITEM set VALUE=DESIRED_VALUE  where id='UUID';`.  You can verify which specific item(s) you'll adjust by adjusting the formula to, `show ITEM where id='UUID';`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- What MySQL errors look like
		If MySQL is causing issues, you'll usually get a 503 error when attempting to run commands from the CLI.
	- How to fix
		This could be as simple as a dead `mysql` daemon on one of your nodes.  You can diagnose this by running through the checks above.  
	- Database Discrepancies
		Throughout the life of your cloud, you may come into issues where the database and OpenStack reflect different information.  This could be a VM that shows a host on one machine but it's actually on another, a volume that is stuck in a `reserved` state but won't change back to active/available, etc.  To fix this, we need to log into the MySQL cluster by running `mysql` and updating the discrepancy with `update ITEM set VALUE=DESIRED_VALUE  where id='UUID';`.  You can verify which specific item(s) you'll adjust by adjusting the formula to, `show ITEM where id='UUID';`.
```

capitalization

#### Nova

	- Checks:

> To check the nova status, source the Admin openrc file or app credential and run:

Reviewer: I don't know if a reader is likely to know what an "app credential" is here, but it's probably harmless to mention it

Author: I can include a link to the OpenStack App credential page.

```
openstack compute service list
```

This will list all nova services and show if any are down or not running.  A "XXX" status simply means that service has missed a heartbeat message in rabbitmq to the control node.  A "down" status means the service has missed enough to be considered off or problematic.

> 	- What Nova errors look like
> 		Nova errors will generally be the case where you are getting "No valid hosts available" when their should be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- What Nova errors look like
		Nova errors will generally be the case where you are getting "No valid hosts available", when there should be hosts available.
```

Also, if you run `mkdocs` you'll see it fails to format this whole section, I believe you can fix by adding a blank line before the first bullet (and de-denting bullets per above).

Author: I can drop in a link to the OpenStack app credential page.

	- How to Fix
		This will simply be the case where we see a dead service on some/all nodes.  Running through the checks will show any/all down nodes.  OpenStack won't deploy new VMs to nova-compute services that are down.  Attempting a restart should bring the services back online or show some errors in the logs about what is causing the nova-compute service to go down.
	- How to take down nodes for maintenance
		Eventually, you will have to take some compute nodes offline for maintenance in some capacity.  The first thing you want to do, is set those nova-computes to disabled:
``` bash
openstack compute service set --disable --disable-reason maintenance <node hostname> nova-compute
```
Then, check to see if the node has VMs running on it.  You can do this with:
``` bash
openstack host show <node hostname>
```
If this has any CPU/Memory/Disk used, it probably has VMs running on it and they need to be migrated to other nodes.  We can do this with:
``` bash
nova host-evacuate-live <node hostname>
```

> This will send the VMs on that node to other availabe nodes.  Once this completes, the node will be out of production and available for the maintenance required.  After said maintenance is completed, you can bring the node back into production with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will send the VMs on that node to other available nodes.  Once this completes, the node will be out of production and available for the maintenance required.  After said maintenance is completed, you can bring the node back into production with:
```

spelling fix

Also, we should tell people how to know when the evacuation completes. (Maybe by re-running `nova host show`?)

``` bash
openstack compute service set --enable <node hostname> nova-compute
```

#### Neutron

	- Checks:

> To check the neutron services status, source the Admin openrc file or app credential and run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check the Neutron services status, source the Admin openrc file or app credential and run:
```
capitalization
